AI Control Layer 
Build a flexible AI control layer to secure and govern interactions with Agentic AI systems (AI 
agents, MCP services, LLMs, APIs). This layer will help organizations protect data, apply 
required guardrails, manage API budgets, and block emerging exploits while maintaining 
developer speed. Create the ultimate hybrid defense system for the generative AI era! 
1. Introduction - organization, context and current state 
Modern organizations continuously advance security of their infrastructures while fostering 
safe and secure technological innovation. Work is being done to ensure that cutting-edge 
technologies, such as AI, can be adopted safely by developers and employees without 
compromising data privacy, financial budgets, or more broadly the organizational security. The 
goal is to bridge the gap between the need of rapid software development and cybersecurity 
controls and practices. 
Nowadays, developers leverage AI and Agentic AI pervasively in their work. These technologies 
are used to write code, draft documents, and analyze data. Similarly, AI and Agentic AI systems 
used pervasively to support or fully automate numerous business processes. While this 
dramatically increases productivity, it also introduces risks that traditional security tools are 
not necessarily equipped to handle. 
 
Organizations face new problems when adopting AI and Agentic AI: 
Among others, agentic systems require more modern and dynamic authentication and access 
control. Without local enforcement, agentic systems can easily access resources they 
shouldn’t access, impersonate other actors and perform harmful and irreversible actions. 
Input validation and output filtering represent another critical risk vector. Unlike traditional 
applications with structured inputs, AI systems interpret natural language as execution logic, 
making them highly vulnerable to such attacks as prompt injection. On the output side, a lack of 
rigorous filtering means AI systems can return sensitive data. 
Furthermore, organizations struggle with managing access to memory and resource 
consumption, especially within autonomous agentic workflows. When agents rely on persistent 
context or shared memory stores, they can trigger unauthorized data retrievals or get trapped in 
runaway execution loops. As their behaviour is non-deterministic, they can cause unexpectedly 
high resource consumption. 
To address these risks, organizations need strong and comprehensive controls (often called 
guardrails) for AI which can be implemented and enforced with a flexible and adaptive control 
layer (e.g. something that acts as a smart intermediary). Such layer must instantly inspect, 
redact, or block unsafe interactions in real-time, using a hybrid approach of traditional policy 
enforcement combined with AI-supported enforcement.  
 
Note: The potential threats listed above represent only examples of risks in agentic systems. 
When designing your control layer, you should analyze the AI ecosystem deeply and review 
available sources (e.g. OWASP) and consider what other controls may need to be implemented 
to ensure a comprehensive, production-ready defense system which addresses emerging risks 
and threats. 
 
2. Challenge 
Your task is to build a lightweight, flexible AI Control Layer. This layer can be implemented as a 
gateway, proxy, middleware, or SDK wrapper that intercepts and governs interactions with AI 
systems. This control layer must enforce security, privacy, and resource controls defined 
in/provided by a centralized configuration source (e.g. control catalog). The layer should have 
the ability to generate reporting suitable for security teams as well as management (e.g. via UI 
or otherwise). 
To achieve the optimal balance between speed and deep semantic understanding, your control 
layer must implement a hybrid defense architecture utilizing both non-AI (deterministic) and AI-
based (semantic) controls. 
Furthermore, when designing the control layer, think about how to make it resilient enough to 
manage budgets for both external commercial APIs and locally hosted models, and how it can 
detect or mitigate known historical attacks on AI infrastructure (i.e. where signatures of such 
attacks can be fed from some externally managed system). 
To prove the reliability and robustness of your solution, you must also deliver a complete, 
automated testing suite showcasing both positive (allowed) and negative (blocked/redacted) 
test cases for the controls which you will implement. 
 
3. Expected Outcome 
1. AI Control Layer: A functional gateway, proxy, middleware, or SDK wrapper (or othere 
component) that developers can easily integrate into the AI systems (e.g. agent to 
agent, app to agent, agent to MCP, agent to model, etc communication). 
a) You can build your own agent OR use an already existing agent to showcase the 
solution. 
b) You should provide a simple diagram presenting the architecture of your 
solution. 
2. Sample Configuration: Documented policy file configuring the controls/guardrails and 
demonstrating different configurable strictness/adherence levels and budget rules for 
those controls. 
3. Simple Interactive Dashboard: UI displaying controls, overall security posture, blocked 
threats, and other metrics (e.g. resource consumption/cost). 
4. Executable Test Suite: A ready to run test-suite which can verify implementation of your 
controls, including budget limits and exploit mitigation. 
 
4. Formal Requirements 
1. Centralized Policy Engine: A single config source (e.g. file/system) managing controls, 
sensitivity thresholds (Block vs Redact or adherence %), allowed LLM models, and 
resource/financial budgets. 
2. Controls/Guardrails:  
1. Deterministic (Non-AI): e.g. pattern matching (detecting PII or secrets), checking 
of authentication or access requirements, etc.  
2. Semantic (AI-Based): where possible, consider using AI-based solutions/model 
to secure interaction with the AI systems. 
3. Budget and Resource Governance: When designing the control layer, think about how to 
enforce budget limits (e.g. resource access, compute time or token spend for access to 
LLMs). 
4. Historical Attack Mitigation: think about how to detect and block patterns associated 
with successful historical exploits on AI systems, such as malicious code execution, 
unsafe deserialization, or supply-chain exploits targeting model repositories. 
5. Security Reporting & Auditing: real-time metrics (blocked interactions, budget usage) for 
management and exportable audit logs designed for security teams to analyze threats, 
policy violations, and system usage; can be implemented as a dedicated dashboard or 
otherwise. 
6. Self-Testing Suite: Automated test suite verifying both positive (allowed) and negative 
(blocked) cases for the controls. 
 
5. Technical Requirements 
Teams have complete flexibility in choosing their technology stack, whether they build the 
solution from scratch using languages like Go, Rust, or Python, or build upon existing open-
source tools (make sure you check the license of these tools). For the actual agents, LLMs and 
applications, which will use your control layer, you can use pre-existing tooling (agents, 
applications and other unrelated components will not be subject to assessment).  
6. Testing and/or Validation Approach 
The evaluation relies primarily on the teams own deliverables and spontaneous, zero-
preparation actions. Judges will execute the automated test suite provided by the team (so 
make sure it allows to test the implemented controls). The test suite must contain both positive 
and negative test cases to prove the system works as intended. Judges may interactively test 
the running control layer in real time using spontaneous, ad-hoc prompts and observing how 
the system reacts. The judges may modify the configuration files/feeds to your AI Control Layer 
(e.g. changing rules, removing controls, adjusting thresholds) to understand how the control 
layer behaves with new configuration (how changes are reflected, can they adjust in real-time, 
etc). You should be able to produce performance telemetry as it may be used for evaluation. 
The judges will also review the overall architecture, dashboards and logging information which 
can be provided for management and security teams. 
 
7. Available Resources 
No pre-packaged datasets, proprietary APIs, or specific hardware resources are provided for 
this challenge. This is intentional to give teams complete architectural freedom and to avoid the 
constraints of static synthetic data. Teams are expected to use publicly available open-source 
libraries where necessary and local models (such as those run via Ollama), and their own self-
created test prompts to demonstrate and validate their control layer. No subscriptions on paid 
services (e.g. OpenAI, Anthropic, Copilot, etc) will be provided for this challenge so ensure that 
you can design, build and run the entire system on your own setup. 
 
 
8. Evaluation Criteria 
To ensure a balanced assessment of both technical execution and practical utility, the projects 
will be evaluated based on the following criteria: 
• Robustness of the Solution and Quality of Guardrails (30%) 
• Architecture and Performance Efficiency (20%) 
• Security Reporting (20%) 
• Completeness of the Self-Testing Suite (15%) 
• Practical Implementability and Scalability (15%) 
 
 
 